Add instructions for running a openQA/tools dev environment (#6590)
os-autoinst/openQA: docs/Contributing.asciidoc

*** Do *not* get too creative with computational default values, e.g. `sub foo ($first, $second = rand($first)) {`
*** Do *not* combine sub attributes with signatures (requires Perl 5.28+), e.g. `sub foo :lvalue ($first) {`

* General

** Let http://perltidy.sourceforge.net/[Perltidy] tidy perl files
automatically:

    tools/tidyall --git # tidy changed files
    tools/tidyall --all # tidy all files
    make tidy # to tidy also JavaScript files in the openQA project

> 

Reviewer: This looks inconsistent and redundant. The first sentence says "tidy perl" but then "make tidy" mentions JavaScript files. Our Makefile is well structured. Please don't pick details out of it. Just calling `make tidy` is what we should do and that is what https://github.com/os-autoinst/openQA/pull/6590/files#diff-4d6d1050121df87969e32770abd50500a1fbda9f136db4fbb374fe05a236f2c2R59 already mentions. so why this point "General" at all?

dependencies is using the available os-autoinst and openQA packages, as
described in the Installation Guide.

> In the case of os-autoinst, some http://www.cpan.org/[CPAN] modules are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst[os-autoinst], some http://www.cpan.org/[CPAN] modules are
```

The openQA package is built on top of Mojolicious, an excellent Perl framework
for web development that will be extremely familiar to developers coming from
other modern web frameworks like Sinatra and that have nice and comprehensive

> documentation available at its https://mojolicious.org/[home page].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation available at its https://mojolicious.org/[mojolicious home page].
```

Author: If we are talking about Mojolicious in this paragraph, then `its Mojolicious home page` sounds weird.

As stated in the previous section, every feature implemented in both packages
should be backed by proper tests.
http://perldoc.perl.org/Test/Most.html[Test::Most] is used to implement those

> tests. As usual, tests are located under the `/t/` directory.

Reviewer 3: I think it should be `t/`

Author: Yeah, I was also wondering about the leading slash. This sentence I only moved around. I will remove the slash.

templates:: HTML templates delivered by web UI
tools:: Development tools

[[dependencies]]
== Dependencies

Here we differentiate between these types of dependencies:

* Runtime: run openQA
* Test: run the test suite of openQA itself
* For developers: style checks, code coverage etc.

You can get those dependencies in several ways:

* Packaged in openSUSE and other distributions
* Manually install from source
* Perl modules via CPAN client
* Use a prebuilt container

We manage our dependencies via a central `dependencies.yaml` file per
repository. We generate the `.spec` files for `rpm` as well as a `cpanfile`
for quicker installation of all Perl modules.

[[runtime-dependencies]]
=== Runtime Dependencies

For openSUSE you need the packages `openQA` and `os-autoinst`.
That should be everything necessary to run an openQA instance. For more
details check <<Installing.asciidoc#_installation,Installation>.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

file or the spec file, e.g. `dist/rpm/openQA.spec` (or `dist/rpm/*.spec` in
general). You can leave out sections starting with `test_requires` for example.

A CPAN client will by default also leave out modules for testing and
development.

As alternative you can try out the
<<Installing.asciidoc#single-instance-container,Single-Instance Container>> as
a minimal runtime environment.

[[development-dependencies]]
=== Development Dependencies

For openSUSE:
```
zypper install openQA-devel
```

For distributions without those packages, look into `dependencies.yaml` or
`dist/rpm/openQA.spec` like above. The `devel_*requires` sections/definitions
list dependencies for tests and development.

If you just want to run the test suite to see if it passes on your platform,
you would not need the developer's dependencies, like `Perl::Tidy` and
`Devel::Cover`. They are recommended as soon as you plan a contribution.

For the UI tests you need `perl-Selenium-Remote-Driver` as well as
`chromedriver` and either `chrome` or `chromium`.

See <<Contributing.asciidoc#run-tests-in-container,Run tests in a container>>
for a container with all dependencies.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

[[development-setup]]
== Development setup

For the lazy, check out the <<Contributing.asciidoc#quick-container-setup,Quick

> container setup>> with instructions you can mostly copy & paste.

Reviewer: > That link does not make it clear to me what I should link to. This is just pointing to Contributing.asciidoc
Sorry, it seems I prepared comments and then published them later when you already updated so the links don't match anymore. My suggestion is in this section to include a sentence to "read on" in the following section https://github.com/os-autoinst/openQA/blob/master/docs/Contributing.asciidoc#testing

templates:: HTML templates delivered by web UI
tools:: Development tools

[[dependencies]]
== Dependencies

Here we differentiate between these types of dependencies:

* Runtime: run openQA
* Test: run the test suite of openQA itself
* For developers: style checks, code coverage etc.

You can get those dependencies in several ways:

* Packaged in openSUSE and other distributions
* Manually install from source
* Perl modules via CPAN client
* Use a prebuilt container

We manage our dependencies via a central `dependencies.yaml` file per
repository. We generate the `.spec` files for `rpm` as well as a `cpanfile`
for quicker installation of all Perl modules.

[[runtime-dependencies]]
=== Runtime Dependencies

For openSUSE there is `openQA` and `os-autoinst`, including several subpackages.
That should be everything necessary to run an openQA instance.

```
zypper install openQA os-autoinst

> ```

Reviewer: That is not correct as it leaves out the worker package and hence it does not make sense to pull in os-autoinst. Instead of repeating (incorrectly) I suggest to just point to our installation instructions.

Reviewer 2: since this is a 5min development environment setup I would prefer to not ping pong over documentations and have everything in the same section/file/page

Author: I changed it a bit now.

Reviewer: I couldn't find this in the changes anymore. If you removed the relevant part I guess we are good and you can resolve this conversation

There is a <<Installing.asciidoc#single-instance-container,Single-Instance Container>>
which can be tried out as a minimal installation.

[[development-dependencies]]
=== Development Dependencies

For openSUSE:
```
zypper install os-autoinst-devel openQA-devel
```

For distributions without those packages, look into `dependencies.yaml` or
`dist/rpm/openQA.spec` like above. The `devel_*requires` sections/definitions
list dependencies for tests and development.

If you just want to run the test suite to see if it passes on your platform,
you would not need the developer's dependencies, like `Perl::Tidy` and
`Devel::Cover`. They are recommended as soon as you plan a contribution.

For the UI tests you need `perl-Selenium-Remote-Driver` as well as
`chromedriver` and either `chrome` or `chromium`.

See <<Contributing.asciidoc#run-tests-in-container,Run tests in a container>>
for a container with all dependencies.

[[development-setup]]
== Development setup

The following explains in detail what is necessary to develop openQA code.

For something to mostly just copy & paste, check out the
<<Contributing.asciidoc#quick-container-development-setup,Quick container
development setup>>.

> Otherwise follow the detailed steps below. This setup leaves it up to
> you if you run this in a container or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise follow the detailed steps below. This setup is applicable to
a container environment as well as without.
```

Author: done

general). You can leave out sections starting with `test_requires` for example.

A CPAN client will by default also leave out modules for testing and
development.

There is a <<Installing.asciidoc#single-instance-container,Single-Instance Container>>
which can be tried out as a minimal installation.

[[development-dependencies]]
=== Development Dependencies

For openSUSE:
```
zypper install os-autoinst-devel openQA-devel
```

For distributions without those packages, look into `dependencies.yaml` or
`dist/rpm/openQA.spec` like above.

The `-devel` packages will install dependencies for tests and development.

If you just want to run the test suite to see if it passes on your platform,
you would not need the developer's dependencies, like `Perl::Tidy` and
`Devel::Cover`. They are recommended as soon as you plan a contribution.

For the UI tests you need `perl-Selenium-Remote-Driver` as well as
`chromedriver` and either `chrome` or `chromium`.

See <<Contributing.asciidoc#run-tests-in-container,Run tests in a container>>
for a container with all dependencies.

[[development-setup]]
== Development setup

The following explains in detail what is necessary to develop openQA code.

> For something to mostly just copy & paste, check out the

Reviewer 3: > For something to mostly just copy & paste

I would rather say something like

`The simplest approach. if you are in hurry...`

Reviewer 3: if you need the job done...
Alternative, ...

In general I dont expect _copy paste_ of my words, as they are only for inspiration or demostrate intention. So even without `if you are in hurry` is also ok with me

Reviewer: Instead of "For something to mostly just copy & paste" please explain the specific use case this is useful for in comparison to the other existing way. And I assume that the focus of the new section is for system level testing and not for "test driven development", right?

Reviewer: I like the current state :+1:

export OPENQA_SECRET=1234567890ABCDEF
----

==== Postgres Container

To be able to keep the database when stopping the container, we create a
named volume.
We are using a Debian postgres container here, but it doesn't matter what
you use.
[source,sh]
----
### host ###
podman volume create mypostgres
podman run -it --rm --name postgres-openqa \
    -v mypostgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
    -p 5432:5432 \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="x" \
    -d \
    docker.io/library/postgres:17

# Optionally add this to mount a directory for sql dumps to import
#    -v "$SQL_DUMP_DIR:/sqldumps" \
----

For the next step you need to execute commands in the container:

[source,sh]
----
# Create the role and database
podman exec -it postgres-openqa su - postgres

createuser --no-createdb --pwprompt geekotest
# enter password ('x' in this example)
createdb -O geekotest openqa-local
----

==== Distrobox

You can use a leap container and install the requirements, but you can also
build your own container with the requirements already installed.

[source,sh]
----
### host ###
distrobox create -i registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/leap:15.6 -n box-openqadev
distrobox enter box-openqadev

> ### distrobox ###

Author: done, although it seems a bit verbose to me

# Leap 15.6
zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/15.6 devel-openqa \
    && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA:/Leap:/15.6/15.6/ devel-openqa-leap \

# Tumbleweed
#zypper addrepo -G p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed devel-openqa \
#        && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/SUSE:/CA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed/SUSE:CA.repo \

zypper -n ref && zypper -n install ca-certificates-suse \
        os-autoinst-devel openQA-devel \
        os-autoinst-scripts-deps \
        os-autoinst-scripts-deps-devel \

>         openssh-clients \

Author: openssh-clients is necessary to do `git clone git@...`

Should we add it to os-autoinst and openQA requirements?

Author: The question is, should it be only a development requirement?
Even in normal instances people would want to clone via ssh. Or should it be just a `Recommends`?

Reviewer: the dependency was introduced with https://github.com/os-autoinst/openQA/pull/6611 so I guess you can remove this line

        crudini
# plus your favourite dev tools, e.g. tmux
----
Note: https://github.com/pixelb/crudini[`crudini`] is a tool for manipulating
values in ini files.

Time to grab a hot beverage...

==== Git

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox ###
# Remember to source this file
source ~/localopenqa.leap.sh
mkdir $OPENQA_BASEDIR
mkdir $OPENQA_REPOS
mkdir $OPENQA_BASEDIR/openqa $OPENQA_CONFIG $OPENQA_BASEDIR/perl5 $OPENQA_BASEDIR/openqa/db

git clone git@github.com:os-autoinst/openQA $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA
git clone git@github.com:os-autoinst/os-autoinst $OPENQA_REPOS/os-autoinst

> git clone git@github.com:os-autoinst/scripts $OPENQA_REPOS/scripts

Reviewer 2: Confirm that is only my problem due to the fact that I'm using different ssh key for different projects and I'm using direnv to load them and in distrobox to use them I need to source the file where they are defined.

----

==== Config Files

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox ###
echo <<< EOM
[localhost]
key = 1234567890ABCDEF
secret = 1234567890ABCDEF
EOM >> $OPENQA_CONFIG/client.conf

echo <<< EOM
[production]
dsn = dbi:Pg:dbname=openqa-local;host=127.0.0.1;port=5432
user = geekotest
password = x
EOM >> $OPENQA_CONFIG/database.ini

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/workers.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global HOST http://localhost:9526
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global WORKER_HOSTNAME 127.0.0.1

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/openqa.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini auth method Fake
----

==== Build openQA

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox ###
# Build steps
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/os-autoinst
make
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA
make node_modules

# Optionally check if you can access the database
#psql -U geekotest -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5432 openqa-local

# Initialize the database schema. This is using the database.ini you
# created above.
$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/initdb --init_database
----

==== Run openQA

Ready!

> For playing with the Webui, you just need to run this one daemon.

Reviewer 4: The many times are probably mostly due to me. The reason I think UI should be separated is that it is an abbreviation and abbreviations are generally treated just like any other word and thus need to be preceded by a space here. Note that "webUI" is also not a name like "openQA".

I think Wikipedia is a good example, e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_interface always precedes "UI" with a space if used in the middle of a sentence. The same counts for abbreviations that are units, e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millisecond.

Some common settings we are using here:

* `OPENQA_BASEDIR=$HOME/openqadev.leap`
* Database name: `openqa-local`
* Database user: `geekotest`
* Database container name: `postgres-openqa`

==== Environment Variables

Create a file that you can `source` whenever you want to work in this
environment:

File: `~/localopenqa.leap.sh`:
[source,sh]
----
#!/bin/bash

# The directory where openQA operates in and creates everything in:
# * git repos
# * openQA assets, pool directory, testresults
# * configuration

export OPENQA_BASEDIR=$HOME/openqadev.leap

# The rest of the variables can likely stay like this

# If you want to import database dumps from elsewhere
#export SQL_DUMP_DIR=$HOME/sqldumps

export OPENQA_CONFIG=$OPENQA_BASEDIR/config
export OPENQA_REPOS="$OPENQA_BASEDIR/git"
PATH=$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/scripts:$PATH

# ----------- CPAN ------------
# Whenever necessary, you can install additional modules from CPAN like:
# cpanm -l $OPENQA_BASEDIR/perl5 Some::Module@1.23
export PERL5LIB=$OPENQA_BASEDIR/perl5/lib/perl5
PATH=$OPENQA_BASEDIR/perl5/bin:$PATH

export OPENQA_KEY=1234567890ABCDEF
export OPENQA_SECRET=1234567890ABCDEF
----

==== Postgres Container

> To be able to keep the database when stopping the container, we create a

Reviewer 5: niptick: would it be better if you say `To be able to reuse the database..`?

Author: I rephrased it

named volume.
We are using a Debian postgres container here, but it doesn't matter what
you use.
[source,sh]
----
### host ###
podman volume create mypostgres
podman run -it --rm --name postgres-openqa \
    -v mypostgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
    -p 5432:5432 \

>     -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="x" \

Author: It's using the default user `postgres`

    -d \
    docker.io/library/postgres:17

# Optionally add this to mount a directory for sql dumps to import

> #    -v "$SQL_DUMP_DIR:/sqldumps" \

Reviewer 5: NOTE: Optionally add `-v "$SQL_DUMP_DIR:/sqldumps"` to mount a directory for sql dumps to import

Author: I like it the way it is now for easy moving into the above command

----

For the next step you need to execute commands in the container:

[source,sh]
----
# Create the role and database
podman exec -it postgres-openqa su - postgres

### postgres container ###
createuser --no-createdb --pwprompt geekotest
# enter password ('x' in this example)
createdb -O geekotest openqa-local
----

==== Distrobox

You can use a Leap container and install the requirements, but you can also
build your own container with the requirements already installed.

[source,sh]
----
### host ###
distrobox create -i registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/leap:15.6 -n box-openqadev-leap
distrobox enter box-openqadev-leap

> # Tumbleweed:

Author: This is getting endless now...

> # Tumbleweed:

Reviewer 2: It was just a suggestion... you can keep like it is if there were already a discussion over this!

#distrobox create -i registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/tumbleweed:latest -n box-openqadev-tw

### distrobox container ###

# Leap 15.6
zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/15.6 devel-openqa \
    && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA:/Leap:/15.6/15.6/ devel-openqa-leap

# Tumbleweed
#zypper addrepo -G p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed devel-openqa \
#        && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/SUSE:/CA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed/SUSE:CA.repo

> zypper -n ref && zypper -n install ca-certificates-suse \

Author: to access urls like osd

> zypper -n ref && zypper -n install ca-certificates-suse \

Reviewer 6: It's a publicly accessible repo fwiw

user = geekotest
password = x
EOM >> $OPENQA_CONFIG/database.ini

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/workers.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global HOST http://localhost:9526
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global WORKER_HOSTNAME 127.0.0.1

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/openqa.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini auth method Fake
----

==== Build openQA

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox container ###
# Build steps
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/os-autoinst
make
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA
make node_modules

# Optionally check if you can access the database
#psql -U geekotest -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5432 openqa-local

# Initialize the database schema. This is using the database.ini you
# created above.
$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/initdb --init_database
----

==== Run openQA

Ready!

For playing with the web UI, you just need to run this one daemon.
For running openQA jobs, you need all.

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox container ###
# Main web UI (required for web interface and web API)
$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/openqa-webui-daemon

# Websockets (for workers to connect so they can receive job assignments)

> openqa-websockets daemon

Reviewer 5: Maybe add `$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/` to the other services as well. All those hae to run from the script/ dir

Author: Actually I removed the path from this one.
Because` $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script` is already in `$PATH` if you source the development script.

  look at the
  https://github.com/Martchus/openQA-helper[openQA-helper repository].

[[quick-container-setup]]
=== Quick container development setup

==== Requirements

In these examples we use the following tools which are all in openSUSE Leap:

* https://podman.io/[`podman`]
* https://en.opensuse.org/Distrobox[`distrobox`]

You can use similar tools like `docker`, `toolbox` etc. to achieve the same.

==== Intro

These instructions are ready to use without any changes. You only might want to
change the `OPENQA_BASEDIR` location.

You will run two containers:

* A separate postgres container (so you don't have to deal with the database
  when updating your dev container)
* The openQA environment in an openSUSE Leap or Tumbleweed container, which
  both can use the same postgres container.

>   In this example we will be settting up and using the Leap container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this example we will be setting up and using the Leap container.
```

#    -v "$SQL_DUMP_DIR:/sqldumps" \
----

For the next step you need to execute commands in the container:

[source,sh]
----
# Create the role and database
podman exec -it postgres-openqa su - postgres

### postgres container ###
createuser --no-createdb --pwprompt geekotest
# enter password ('x' in this example)
createdb -O geekotest openqa-local
----

==== Distrobox

You can use a Leap container and install the requirements, but you can also
build your own container with the requirements already installed.

[source,sh]
----
### host ###
distrobox create -i registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/leap:15.6 -n box-openqadev-leap
distrobox enter box-openqadev-leap
# Tumbleweed:
#distrobox create -i registry.opensuse.org/opensuse/tumbleweed:latest -n box-openqadev-tw

### distrobox container ###

# Leap 15.6
zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/15.6 devel-openqa \
    && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA:/Leap:/15.6/15.6/ devel-openqa-leap

# Tumbleweed
#zypper addrepo -G p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/openQA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed devel-openqa \

> #        && zypper addrepo -G -p 95 https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/SUSE:/CA/openSUSE_Tumbleweed/SUSE:CA.repo

Reviewer: Instead of repeating how about pointing to https://github.com/os-autoinst/openQA/blob/master/docs/Installing.asciidoc#development-version-repository instead. This way we also don't need to change the version reference every year

Author: I think I was asked to add Tumbleweed here in a previous review.
I can remove it again...

Reviewer 6: Leave it if it helps getting this PR merged 😉

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/workers.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global HOST http://localhost:9526
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/workers.ini global WORKER_HOSTNAME 127.0.0.1

cp $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/etc/openqa/openqa.ini $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini
crudini --set $OPENQA_CONFIG/openqa.ini auth method Fake
----

==== Build openQA

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox container ###
# Build steps
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/os-autoinst
make
cd $OPENQA_REPOS/openQA
make node_modules

# Optionally check if you can access the database
#psql -U geekotest -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5432 openqa-local

# Initialize the database schema. This is using the database.ini you
# created above.
$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/initdb --init_database
----

==== Run openQA

Ready!

For playing with the Webui, you just need to run this one daemon.
For running openQA jobs, you need all.

[source,sh]
----
### distrobox container ###
# WebUI
$OPENQA_REPOS/openQA/script/openqa-webui-daemon

# Worker
worker --isotovideo "$OPENQA_REPOS/os-autoinst/isotovideo" --instance 1 --verbose --apikey $OPENQA_KEY --apisecret $OPENQA_SECRET

# Websocket
openqa-websockets daemon

> # Scheduler

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Scheduler (assigns jobs to workers)
```
